---
title: 'Lesson Notes '
taxonomy:
    category:
        - docs
visible: true
---


**General Comments:**

Thank you for taking on the role of a FAR Centre Facilitator. You are the
‘conduit’ between the students and the instructor. Your input into the FAR
Centre activities will help shape the quality of the education that awaits the
students. This is a very noble role to be in.

It is recommended that you review the weekly FAR Centre activities prior to the
sessions. Do not hesitate to contact the instructor with any questions you have.

As a facilitator, you will be considering the weekly input that each student
offers. You will supply the instructor with a weekly recap of each student’s
participation… both in quality and quantity. Plus, you will consider and denote
their team participation.

Important: Sometimes the activities will include student opinions and
experiences. As long as they are fitting to the assignment, these really cannot
be graded. In all PMPP courses, we strongly encourage students to share their
experiences… it only has to be relevant to the course content. Again, you are
looking for quality and quantity of what the students share.

There will be numerous occasions when the assignment calls for content that
doesn’t exist. No worries. The students can (creatively) ‘make up’ their own.
They can make up names, titles, dollar estimates, and so on. You see, the goal
of the assignment work is not always in the details but in the overall format of
the finished assignment.

**Unit 1:**

This is the intro session that discusses the activities that make up project
management. Your primary actions are:

-   Play the web-based videos.

-   Encourage discussion.

    -   If a student or team is lacking, offer time for revision before you move
        on.

    -   This week has lots of personal reflection, so there are no single
        ‘correct’ answers… no student should think that one type is better or
        worse than another.

**Unit 2:**

This week starts the 10 weeks of the primary topics of project management. Your
primary actions are:

-   On the ‘FV and PV Worksheet’, the answers can be found on Sheet 2, scrolling
    right to column AA.

    -   Work through these as a class, if necessary. The whole group needs to
        understand the formulae.

-   For the ‘Dashboard Instructions and Sample Charts’ file, it may be easier to
    print these and then have the students cut them out and paste them onto an
    11x17/A4 sheet of paper.

    -   The result is to look like a real-world organizational dashboard.

**Unit 3:**

This is the second topic and should require some creativity to complete. Your
actions are:

-   You may need to guide students to find samples of WBS’s on the web.

-   Excel’s Insert/SmartArt/Hierarchy is a VERY valuable tool to accomplish this
    session with confidence.

    -   If necessary, play a web-video on how to do this.

-   Students should take advantage of the free software from
    [www.yworks.com](http://www.yworks.com), and download yEd.

    -   If necessary, play the 6-minute tutorial to help them.

**Unit 4:**

This is the third topic of PM work. Your actions are:

-   To bring out the best options that students offer in their presentations.

    -   Consider offering a few minutes for revisions after them.

-   Encourage creativity to fill in the gaps.

-   If necessary, review Project Network Diagrams.

    -   Review the text.

    -   Or play a describing web-video.

**Unit 5:**

This is the 4th topic. Your actions are:

-   Help again with flow charting.

-   Help locate a budget sample from the web?

-   IN 5.3.2, students can resort to creative content for variance/root causes.

-   Some students may have a rough time using the Excel file ‘EV Calculations’.

    -   It is OK to offer assistance, or go through this as an entire group.

**Unit 6:**

This unit contains the 5th topic. Your actions are:

-   Play the web videos.

-   If the charting skills (in Excel) are lacking in your group, consider doing
    that exercise as a full group.

-   In the Standard Deviation Data file, the answers can be found on Sheet 2,
    beginning at column AA.

**Unit 7:**

This unit is the 6th topic of PM work. Your actions are:

-   Encourage discussion for each segment.

-   You may need to help with ‘organizational chart’ building in Excel.

-   Play the web videos.

**Unit 8:**

This is the 7th topic: Your actions are:

-   You need to be comfortable running this exercise. Familiarize yourself with
    in. If you have any questions, contact the instructor.

-   For 8.3.1, students will need to creatively fabricate the data to build the
    charts. Offer guidance as necessary.

**Unit 9:**

This is the 8th topic of PM work. Your actions are:

-   This unit contains The Risk Register. This template is used in several PMPP
    courses and it a VERY powerful tool.

    -   As students work though this, they will learn that their Probability and
        Impact numbers have a HUGE effect on the total Risk Contingency.

        -   Encourage revision (lowering) if this happens.

    -   Allow student to enter creative content as necessary to complete this.

**Unit 10:**

This is the 9th topic of 10. Your actions are:

-   Note there are 2 separate files that are “Facilitators Guides”

    -   Open these and use these.

    -   They should be self-explanatory, but if not contact the instructor for
        more details

-   Play the web videos.

**Unit 11:**

This is the 10th and final topic. Your actions are:

-   Note there is a separate file as the ‘Potential Stakeholders Facilitators
    Guide’

    -   Be familiar with this prior to the session.

-   Play the web video.

-   If you can, whether on paper, chalkboard, or whiteboard, draw the DiSC
    12-slice wheel and plot each student’s results. The keys are to:

    -   See the relationships/variance.

        -   A score of: I-33%, D-32%, C- 5%, S-5% would be marked with a spot
            about 2/3rd from the center right in the middle of the ID ‘slice’

    -   Your wheel’s outer ring is 50%. You can draw a middle ring, half way,
        for 25%, if that helps.

    -   Remind students that even though you are drawing a dot for each student,
        their results are NOT a single dot on the wheel, but a ‘wide range’ (AND
        that range usually covers up to half of the wheel).

        -   Therefore, only those that are at the extreme edges have difficulty
            communicating with those that are their opposites.

**Unit 12:**

This unit goes over Ethics and offers a large-group recap project. Your actions
are:

-   Review PMIs Code of Ethics from the web link.

    -   Consider writing some on paper/chalkboard/whiteboard.

-   Play the web videos.
