> **FAR Centre Facilitator Guidebook**

# Course: **\[insert\]**

![](media/image1.jpeg)

Photo by
[rawpixel](https://unsplash.com/photos/XhinqV2j3YA?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)
on
[Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/search/photos/dot-network?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText)

Modified from the Peer Instructor Guidebook by [Tiffany
Sawatzky](https://books.twu.ca/tiffanysawatzky), which is licensed under
a [Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0
International
License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/), except
where otherwise noted.

# Contents

[Course: **\[insert\]** 1](#course-insert)

[Introduction to Trinity Western University
4](#introduction-to-trinity-western-university)

[Mission 4](#mission)

[Core Values 4](#core-values)

[Defining Characteristics of a Facilitator
4](#defining-characteristics-of-a-facilitator)

[The FAR Centre Model 4](#the-far-centre-model)

[TWU Student Learning Outcomes 5](#twu-student-learning-outcomes)

[Syllabus 7](#_Toc1559966)

[Semester Hours: **\[insert\]** 7](#semester-hours-insert)

[Weekly Classes 8](#weekly-classes)

[Online Engagement 8](#online-engagement)

[Assignments 8](#assignments)

[Attendance 9](#attendance)

[Technology Use Policy 9](#technology-use-policy)

[Academic Integrity and Avoiding Plagiarism at TWU
9](#academic-integrity-and-avoiding-plagiarism-at-twu)

[Students with a Disability 9](#students-with-a-disability)

[Campus Closure and Class Cancellation Policy
10](#campus-closure-and-class-cancellation-policy)

[Grading Scale 10](#grading-scale)

[Facilitation Skills 11](#_Toc1559977)

[**SETTING CLASS EXPECTATIONS** 11](#setting-class-expectations)

[Dos and Don'ts of Facilitation 12](#dos-and-donts-of-facilitation)

[**CONDUCTING THE SESSION** 13](#conducting-the-session)

[Wait Time 13](#wait-time)

[Redirecting Questions 16](#redirecting-questions)

[Teaching vs Facilitation: Breaking the Dependency Cycle
16](#teaching-vs-facilitation-breaking-the-dependency-cycle)

[Check for Understanding 17](#check-for-understanding)

[Grading: feedback and self-assessment 18](#_Toc1559985)

[Types of Feedback 18](#types-of-feedback)

[Assessment 20](#assessment)

[Summative VS Formative 20](#summative-vs-formative)

[Mid-Way Check-In 21](#mid-way-check-in)

[Assignment Rubrics 21](#assignment-rubrics)

[Resources 22](#_Toc1559991)

[TWU Campus Resources 22](#twu-campus-resources)

[Games 23](#games)

[Objective 23](#objective)

[Name Games 23](#name-games)

[Get to know you Games 24](#get-to-know-you-games)

[Challenging/Problem Solving 25](#challengingproblem-solving)

[Fun Games 26](#fun-games)

[Simple Classics 29](#simple-classics)

[Students in Distress 29](#students-in-distress)

[Distress Signals 29](#distress-signals)

[Intervention Guidelines 31](#intervention-guidelines)

[Referral Sources 32](#referral-sources)

[How to Pray Outloud 32](#how-to-pray-outloud)

[Pray Out Loud When You’re Alone 32](#pray-out-loud-when-youre-alone)

[**2.** Keep it Short 32](#keep-it-short)

[**3.** Get Your Style On 32](#get-your-style-on)

# Introduction to Trinity Western University

## Mission

TWU is like no other university in Canada in its approach and
commitment: it exists so that the world may experience Christ’s truth,
compassion, reconciliation, and hope; it is a university that is
informed by the rich Christian understandings and traditions that frame
the study of the various academic disciplines; and, it is a university
that is committed to continually building on its educational vitality.

The TWU FAR Centres exist to guide students through online and
face-to-face classes, to foster a sense of belonging as students engage
in the culture and community of TWU, to instill Godly Christian
leadership principles and practices into every facet of students’ lives,
and prepare students for a lifetime of impact and significance in the
world long after the completion of their degree.

A significant aspect of this mission involves helping students discover
who God has created them to be, what He has called them to do, and how
TWU can help them prepare for those unique callings. It is in these ways
that TWU is different than at any other university.

## Core Values

  - Hospitality that conveys a genuine welcome to all that come to TWU,

  - Responsiveness to the changing and individual needs of TWU students
    during times of transition,

  - Supportive Service of our students and student leaders, modeled on
    the love, grace and sacrifice of Jesus Christ, and

  - Empowerment of Students as they take ownership of their university
    journey.

## Defining Characteristics of a Facilitator

A collaborative spirit leading to a sense of “team” characterized by
creative synergy, flexibility when working with others, and grace in
times of challenge.

A “big picture” mindset that takes into account the journey of TWU
students, from arrival to graduation.

Timely support and guidance through TWU courses that strategically
target critical thinking and reflective learning.

Empowerment of student leaders, intended to create a sense of ownership
for campus community and culture, and enthusiasm for being
culture-sharers to our new student populations.

## The FAR Centre Model

…

## TWU Student Learning Outcomes

Trinity Western is a Christian, liberal arts University. As a
***Christian*** university, Trinity Western is grounded in the
historical Christian tradition and seeks to unite reason and faith
through teaching and scholarship. As a ***liberal arts*** university,
Trinity Western prepares students to deal with complexity, diversity,
and change by providing them with a broad knowledge of the wider world
and helping them to develop transferable intellectual and practical
skills.

The Student Learning Outcomes pertain to the whole University but it is
recognized that they apply most directly to the undergraduate
experience. The University’s graduate programs are diverse and highly
specialized and thus support the University student learning outcomes
through curricula which are appropriate to those specializations and the
nature of the degrees offered.

It is intended that through the range of their experiences at Trinity
Western University, students should prepare for a life of learning and
service by developing:

**KNOWLEDGE AND ITS APPLICATION**

  - a broad foundational knowledge of human culture and the physical and
    natural world.

  - a depth of understanding in any chosen field(s) of study. applied
    knowledge acquired through discipline-appropriate experiential
    learning.

**COGNITIVE COMPLEXITY**

  - skills including: critical and creative thinking, quantitative and
    qualitative reasoning, communication, research, and information
    literacy.

  - an ability to articulate various interdisciplinary and
    multi-disciplinary perspectives, integrating informed Christian
    perspectives.

  - an ability to respond with wisdom, humility and charity to
    questions, issues, and problems of the human condition.

**AESTHETIC EXPRESSION AND INTERPRETATION**

  - creative, performative, material and narrative forms of critical
    inquiry.

  - intuitive, imaginative and interpretive methodologies. ways of
    knowing through which maker and receiver come to insight and
    understanding. collaborative and community–based interdisciplinary
    practices.

**INTER-AND INTRA-PERSONAL WELLNESS**

  - a holistic awareness of their personhood, purpose, and calling
    within the context of the communities in which they live and study.
    personal and social health. an appreciation of the role of community
    in wellness.

**SPIRITUAL FORMATION**

  - a spiritual dimension by means of an exposure to a reflective and
    caring Christ-centred community which encourages:
    
      - *a further understanding of God.* o *a discovery of a deep and
        personal spiritual foundation.*
    
      - *an embodiment of a Christ-like way of life characterized by
        love for and service to others.*

**SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY AND GLOBAL ENGAGEMENT**

  - the resources, skills, and motivation to become engaged global
    citizens who serve locally, nationally, and globally in socially and
    economically just ways. a commitment to informed and ethical
    reasoning. respect for the dignity and rights of all persons.
    respect for creation and its sustainable use and care.

**LEADERSHIP**

  - skills to become creative, collaborative, informed, competent, and
    compassionate people who influence the various contexts into which
    they are called. abilities and attitudes characterized by service,
    humility and integrity.

https://www.twu.ca/academics/student-learning-outcomes

> **Latest Revision adopted by University Senate March 10, 2015**
> 
> **Adopted by University Senate November 6, 2012**

# Syllabus

> ![](media/image2.jpg)

**Trinity Western University**

**Undergraduate Course Syllabus**

**Course Number:** **\[insert\]**

**Course Name:** **\[insert\]**

**Semester and Year:** **\[insert\]**

**Instructor of Record:** **\[insert\]**

**Facilitator: \[insert\]**

**Contact Information:** **\[insert\]**@twu.ca

**Office Hours:** **\[insert\]**

**Co-requisites or Pre-requisites:** **\[insert\]**

### Semester Hours: **\[insert\]**

**Course Description:**

**\[insert\]**

**Course Learning Outcomes:**

**\[insert\]**

**Required Texts and Materials:**

**\[insert\]**

**Course Activities/Requirements:**

### Weekly Classes

  - Students will meet weekly with their **\[insert\]** class to
    participate in active learning guided by the Facilitator. Classes
    will invite personal inquiry and engagement with intended learning
    outcomes through a variety of in-class activities and out of class
    assignments.

  - Students are expected to engage with the weekly classes,
    thoughtfully present ideas and opinions during class discussions,
    and contribute to building a respectful and caring environment for
    all students to learn.

### Online Engagement

  - Students will be required to view all course materials online via
    Moodle. The Moodle course contains key information on assignments,
    as well as crucial teaching designed by the Instructor.

### Assignments

  - Students will view all assignment details online via Moodle. Please
    ask your Facilitator if you have any questions or concerns, as they
    will guide you through your learning.

  - All assignments will be submitted via Moodle to the instructor. The
    instructor will assign grades and give feedback.

  - See the assignment details and Grading Scale below. Full
    instructions are in your Moodle course.

**Course Policies:**

### Attendance

Since all of the learning is connected to what happens in the classroom
and is enhanced through active participation of learners, attendance is
**required** for this course. Students are expected to be on time for
class and to stay for the entire duration. Normally absences require a
doctor’s note or evidence of serious extenuating circumstances that
warrant an absence. Students should notify their Facilitator of
extenuating circumstances or illness in advance of the class, or as soon
as possible after the missed class.

Students who miss for illness or extenuating circumstances are
responsible to find out about the learning that occurred in the class
through a peer, and remain responsible for the learning outcomes of that
class.

A respectful learning environment requires all participants to arrive on
time, ready to begin. Frequent late arrivals may be documented as
cumulative unexcused absences.

Students who have **more than three** **unexcused absences**, or do not
complete supplementary assignments for absences related to illness or
extenuating circumstances, will be required to take the course again.
For more information on the general attendance policy at TWU, students
can refer to the Trinity Western University academic calendar
(http://www.twu.ca/academics/academic-calendar).

### Technology Use Policy

We are committed to creating mutually respectful learning communities
concomitant with a use of technology that is a natural and complementary
element to sound instructional practices focused on curriculum outcomes
and sensitive to instructional time.

### Academic Integrity and Avoiding Plagiarism at TWU

One of the core values of Trinity Western University is the integration
of academic excellence with high standards of personal, moral, and
spiritual integrity. The University considers it a serious offence when
an individual attempts to gain unearned academic credit. It is the
student’s responsibility to be informed about what constitutes academic
dishonesty. For details on this, and on identifying and avoiding
plagiarism go to the following resources:

  - TWU University Homepage \> Academics \> Academic Calendar \>
    Academic Information \> Academic Policies \> Academic Dishonesty and
    Plagiarism.

  - <https://prezi.com/od62fxnkbmxh/plagiarism-how-to-get-it-out-of-your-life/>
    (Prezi presentation)

  - <http://bit.ly/1p00KX3> (Google Slide presentation offering more
    comprehensive information)

### Students with a Disability

Students with a disability who need assistance are encouraged to contact
the Equity of Access Office upon admission to TWU to discuss their
specific needs. All disabilities must be recently documented by an
appropriately certified professional and include the educational impact
of the disability along with recommended accommodations. Within the
first two weeks of the semester, students must meet with their
professors to agree on accommodations appropriate to each class.
Students should follow the steps detailed by the Equity of Access Office
outlined in the Student Life section of the University Calendar.

### Campus Closure and Class Cancellation Policy

In the event of extreme weather conditions or other emergency situations
go to: **\[insert\]**.

### Grading Scale

> **Letter**
> 
> **Quality Characteristics Grade**

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><blockquote>
<p>A</p>
</blockquote></th>
<th><strong>Outstanding, excellent work</strong>; exceptional performance with strong evidence of original thinking, good organization, meticulous concern for documented evidence, and obvious capacity to analyze, synthesize, evaluate, discern, justify, and elaborate; frequent evidence of both verbal eloquence and perceptive insight in written expression; excellent problem solving ability in scientific or mathematical contexts with virtually no computational errors; demonstrated masterful grasp of subject matter and its implications. Gives evidence of an extensive and detailed knowledge base. (Note: The A+ grade is reserved for very rare students of exceptional intellectual prowess and accomplishment, especially in lower level courses.)</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><blockquote>
<p>B</p>
</blockquote></td>
<td><strong>Good, competent work</strong>; laudable performance with evidence of some original thinking, careful organization; satisfactory critical and analytical capacity; reasonably error-free expository written expression, with clear, focused thesis and well-supported, documented, relevant arguments; good problem-solving ability, with few computational or conceptual errors in scientific subjects; reasonably good grasp of subject matter but an occasional lack of depth of discernment; evidence of reasonable familiarity with course subject matter, both concepts and key issues. Exhibits a serious, responsible engagement with the course content.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><blockquote>
<p>C</p>
</blockquote></td>
<td><strong>Adequate, reasonably satisfactory work</strong>; fair performance but infrequent evidence of original thinking or the capacity to analyze, synthesize, or evaluate course material; undue reliance on rote memory; difficulty in applying knowledge in unfamiliar contexts; limited problem-solving ability in scientific subjects; fairly clear but quite uninspiring written expression with occasional problems in mechanics or syntax; weak in provision of documented, illustrative, or descriptive evidence; satisfactory grasp of basic elements of the course but frequent lapses in detailed understanding. Satisfies the minimum requirements of the course.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><blockquote>
<p>D</p>
</blockquote></td>
<td><strong>Minimally acceptable work</strong>; relatively weak performance with little evidence of original thinking or ability to analyze or synthesize course material; nominal or weak problem-solving ability in scientific subjects; written expression frequently exhibits difficulty in articulating a central thesis or sustaining a coherent argument; ideas are trite or juvenile, without discernible development. Shows inadequate grasp of some basic elements of the course.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><blockquote>
<p>F</p>
</blockquote></td>
<td><strong>Inadequate work</strong>; poor performance that indicates a lack of understanding or misunderstanding of essential subject matter; seems easily distracted by the irrelevant; written expression is poorly organized, often incoherent, and rife with mechanical and diction errors. Shows little evidence of even basic competency in the course content or skills.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

**Course Outline:**

**\[insert\]**

# Facilitation Skills

## **SETTING CLASS EXPECTATIONS**

Developing group expectations allows your class to share the reasons
they have come together. Gathering expectations gives the group a sense
of ownership; it also gives the Facilitator a better idea of what the
group feels is important for their learning.

**How to generate expectations as a brief routine at the beginning of
class:**

  - Explain what expectations are to the group and provide them with a
    couple of examples.

  - Ask the class to take a few minutes and silently think about what
    they would like to get out of this course.

  - Prompt the class to share their expectations with a peer, group, or
    whole class.

  - Lead the brainstorm by modeling strong facilitation skills and
    recording expectations on paper/ the board.

***What are your Expectations for this class?***

**Agreements for Group Work**

FAR Centre courses emphasize active learning, and this may involve class
discussions, group assignments, partner presentations, etc. Members of
the class need to consider how they would like to work together and what
their norms will be. It is not the job of the facilitator to set the
ground rules; instead, the participants should generate agreements and
be held accountable for their decisions. These agreements will guide the
experience that your class has every time they meet.

**How to Generate Agreements:**

> Set up a brainstorming session at the beginning of the semester.
> 
> Ask the group to tell you ways they agree to work together—you may
> want to give them a couple of examples like “We will start and end on
> time”.
> 
> Ask a member of your class to record as a signal of ownership for the
> group.
> 
> Review each agreement and make sure all group members understand what
> it means.
> 
> Ask if the group: Are you willing to amend the agreements as the need
> arises?
> 
> Ask the group to commit to the list of agreements.
> 
> Use the agreements throughout your time together to help the group
> accomplish its objectives and to stay on task; feel free to review the
> agreements if necessary.

**Turn and Talk:**

  - What will you do if a member of your class is not working within the
    agreements?

  - How will you celebrate when your class does work within the
    agreements?

## Dos and Don'ts of Facilitation

Break into groups of five or six. Assign each person in the group one of
the situations presented below and ask them to lead the group in a
discussion about how they would handle it. Review the “Dos and Don’ts”
on the next page for tips.

**What would YOU do in these situations?**

1.  A student asks you for a copy of your notes from a class last year
    because “his or her mom is in the hospital.”

2.  A student asks you for copies of the materials you have prepared for
    your class but says he or she can’t stay for the actual class.

3.  A student repeatedly arrives late for your class.

4.  The material you have created for the class is on the reading that
    was required for the last class session. No one in the group has
    done the reading.

5.  A student tells you: “I am so busy\! This class is the first one
    that I drop so that I can get everything done.”

6.  A student confides personal problems. (This could range from
    registration difficulties to marital problems.)

7.  A student is attempting to go beyond the actual content of the
    course as presented in class or assignments.

**Do**

  - Say “yes” to students’ requests whenever it is reasonably possible
    to do so.

  - Remind yourself of the course learning outcomes and goals.

  - Recognize the limits of your job description and training. You are a
    Facilitator of the course, but that’s as far as you have to go. All
    course content is explained via the Moodle course, so that is the
    first reference point to direct students to. For unanswered
    course-related questions, either communicate those to the
    Instructor, or ask the student to email the Instructor directly.

  - Listen patiently to all other problems not related to the course.
    When in doubt, contact the FAR Centre Supervisor immediately if you
    are concerned about the students’ safety.

  - Attempt to treat all students as you would treat a friend.

  - Provide straightforward, truthful responses.

**Don’t**

  - Allow yourself to be drawn into an argument with students.

  - Demand that students have to defend themselves to you; if they miss
    a session, act concerned, but don’t demand an explanation.

  - Say anything that would make you sound like an authority of any
    kind.

  - Feel obligated to fix problems that students create and can solve
    for themselves. Just remember to be diplomatic when you must decline
    the invitation to get involved.

  - Feel obligated to be available to students 24/7. Your own work and
    well-being must take priority.

**THE INSIDE SCOOP ON WORKING WITH STUDENTS**

The relationship Facilitators have with their students is critical to
the success of the FAR Centres. Above all, students should always feel
welcomed, accepted, and believed by the Facilitator. If a student is
repeatedly disruptive and is not responding to your management
techniques, the Supervisor should be consulted to help deal with the
problem student.

## **CONDUCTING THE SESSION**

Break into small groups. Assign each person in the group one or more of
the situations presented below and ask them to lead the group in a
discussion about how they would handle it. Choose one situation to act
out for the whole group.

**What would YOU do in these situations?**

1.  One person is dominating the conversation of the group.

2.  Students are having side conversations.

3.  All of the interactions in your class are between you and the
    students. There is no student-to-student interaction.

4.  Every time you ask a question, the group becomes very quiet.

5.  You have one student in the session who rarely talks.

6.  A student becomes confrontational and suggests the classes are a
    waste of time.

7.  Students who typically do not show up for sessions are being shunned
    by those who do.

## Wait Time

**Definition:**

Wait-Time is the time that elapses between a Facilitator-initiated
question and the next behavior (student response or the Leader talking
again).

**There are two kinds of wait-time:**

*Wait-time 1: The time the* Facilitator *waits after asking a question.*

*Wait-time 2: The time the* Facilitator *waits after a response is
provided, regardless of the accuracy.*

**Rationale:**

Wait-Time is an important factor in successful FAR Centre classes.
Extensive research has demonstrated that the quality and quantity of
students’ verbal responses increases significantly if Facilitators
regularly utilize at least 15-20 seconds of wait-time.

Wait-time 2 seems to be even more significant than Wait-time 1. So, once
again, if Facilitators resist the natural temptation to jump in too
quickly to answer or rephrase, student learning improves. Increased
wait-time allows the brain more opportunity to consolidate information,
which allows for deeper processing of information. According to de Jong
and Ferguson-Hessler, deep-level knowledge is associated with
comprehension, abstraction, critical judgment, and evaluation.
Deep-level knowledge “has been thoroughly processed, structured, and
stored in memory in a way that makes it useful for application and task
performance.”

**Research findings:**

**For Students:**

1.  More students answer.

2.  More accurate answers.

3.  Answers are more elaborate, reasoned, and supported.

4.  Students listen to each other more.

5.  More speculative responses.

6.  More questions asked.

7.  More participation by poorer students.

8.  Increase in use of logical consistency in responses.

**For Facilitator:**

1.  Asks fewer questions.

2.  Connects questions better.

3.  Asks more higher-order questions.

4.  Demonstrates greater flexibility.

5.  Expects more from poorer students.

<!-- end list -->

  - Rowe, M. B. (1974). Wait-Time and rewards as instructional
    variables, their influence on language, logic, and fate control:
    Part 1—wait-time. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 11(2),
    81-94.

  - deJong, T. & Ferguson-Hessler, M. G. M. (1996). Types and qualities
    of knowledge. Educational Psychologist, 31(2), 105-113.

  - School Improvement in Maryland. (2003). What have we learned about
    good instruction? Retrieved
    
    March 11, 2003, from:
    http://www.mdk12.org/practices/good\_instruction/projectbetter/thinkingskills/ts-83-85.html

**When Students Don’t Respond:**

You may worry about what to do if no one responds. After waiting 15-20
seconds with no responses, you may want to try one of the following:

> Repeat the question
> 
> Rephrase the question
> 
> Simplify the question

  - Ask a student to attempt to rephrase the question.

  - Break down the question into its component parts.

  - Make the question more specific.

  - Ask students what it is about the question they do not understand.
    After each alternative, wait 5-10 seconds.

What can you, as a Facilitator, do if no one answers a question?

(Adapted from UMKC, Kansas City)

### Redirecting Questions

Redirecting questions can be considered the process most central to
powerful facilitation. The process itself is fairly simple to
understand, but difficult to practice without a context in which to do
so. The goal of this process is to encourage more and better
student-to-student interactions in the sessions. It is based on the
concept that we all learn better when we have to explain something to
someone else. The natural tendency for anyone is to answer questions
asked; this process requires the Facilitator to suppress that tendency
and redirect questions back to the group.

### Teaching vs Facilitation: Breaking the Dependency Cycle

One of the goals of FAR Centre courses is to foster independent
learners. The Dependency Cycle (sometimes called “learned helplessness”)
is a pattern of learned behaviour that allows students to remain
dependent upon an authority figure (in this case: the Facilitator) for
learning. Often, we foster dependency by relying too heavily on
repetition and quickly answering questions. Without being intentional
about how we facilitate our courses, students may expect you – the
Facilitator – to do all the learning for them.

First-year students will have problems, so they will ask a question,
which may lead to their being told again, perhaps more slowly the second
or third time. Brophy (1995) found that highly successful teachers and
facilitators implement strategies to help students overcome this
“learned helplessness” or Dependency Cycle by engaging in supportive
behaviours, providing reassurance, and making personal appeals to
students to improve performance. They de-emphasize activities that
promote competition and comparison and emphasize non-evaluative
strategies and cooperative strategies, such as matrices, reciprocal
questioning, and think-pair-share.

  - Facilitators should act more as facilitators than as judges.

  - Facilitators should focus more on learning processes than on
    outcomes.

  - Facilitators should react to errors or ‘being stuck’ as natural and
    useful parts of the learning process rather than evidence of
    failure.

  - Facilitators should model and celebrate all of the above\!

**Sample Phrases to Redirect Questions:**

> What is this question asking for?
> 
> Why are you thinking of it in that way?
> 
> Give an example of that.
> 
> Can you summarize the discussion up to this point?
> 
> Can you think of another way to think about this?
> 
> How is your answer (point of view) different from \_\_\_\_\_?
> 
> Let’s rephrase it on the board and figure out what information we will
> need to answer it.
> 
> Can you be more specific?
> 
> How does your response tie into \_\_\_\_?
> 
> Let’s look that up in the text.
> 
> Let’s write down everything we know about this topic/problem/theory.
> 
> How can you relate this to everyday life?
> 
> Okay, that’s the book definition, but how do we define that (i.e. in
> your own words)?

**So, how do you think you can redirect questions?**

*Practice Exercise*

1.  Have each participant write down a question that could be asked in
    this class.

2.  Make sure that the group is in a circle to avoid this evolving into
    a mini-lecture.

3.  Select one participant to take the role of the Facilitator.

4.  Have the participants ask the questions they have written down.

5.  Have the Facilitator redirect the questions to the group. Group
    members should answer as naturally as possible.

6.  After several exchanges, change who is taking the role of the
    Facilitator and repeat the process.

**How does this process attempt to break the Dependency Cycle?**

What would you do if the response by the student after the Facilitator’s
redirect were “If I knew how to do this problem, I wouldn’t have to take
this course”?

Are there some questions that should not be redirected? Give an example.

(Adapted from UMKC, Kansas City)

### Check for Understanding

**Definition:**

The learning strategies that Facilitators use in their sessions are
designed to promote active learning and student-to-student interactions.
We cannot automatically assume, however, that the students are gaining
understanding from their interactions. Instead, we must check for
understanding by asking the students to confirm that they have learned
the content.

**Rationale:**

The most common method of checking understanding is to ask the students
a closed-ended question like, “Do you understand?” This question can be
answered with a simple yes or no. This is not effective because students
are sometimes uncomfortable admitting that they still do not understand
a concept, especially if considerable time has just been spent on it
during the session. Instead, questions that check for understanding
should be open-ended and require higher-order thinking skills.

It is essential that students can explain in their own words so the
Facilitator knows that students understand before proceeding. If there
is any doubt that the students did not “get” it, the concept should be
discussed again. The Facilitator should make sure that the students get
a chance to demonstrate their understanding so that demonstrating
understanding becomes part of the class. This will improve student
preparation and learning.

**Possible Ways to Check for Understanding:**

1.  Always maintain eye contact with the students during the session. By
    making eye contact, you will likely see when a student is confused.

2.  Ask a student to summarize the concept just covered. If s/he
    struggles, ask the group to help him/her.

3.  Ask for a volunteer to write the main points of the discussion on
    the board.

4.  Once in a while, intentionally make a mistake. The students will
    catch you if they understand. If no one notices, then your class is
    likely not truly understanding. (Frequent use of this strategy may
    confuse students.)

5.  Ask the students to rephrase the question you asked originally or
    the summary another student gave.

6.  Share a real-life examples or applications of the concept and ask
    your class to share as stories as well.

(Adapted from UMKC, Kansas City)

**Excellent Resources:**

  - Global Learning Partners – [How to Ensure Hospitality in the Design
    and Facilitation of Your
    Course](http://www.globallearningpartners.com/downloads/resources/tip_sheet_-_how_to_ensure_hospitality_in_the_design_and_faciliatation.pdf).

  - [Introverts vs. Extroverts: Tips for Designing and
    Facilitating](http://www.globallearningpartners.com/downloads/resources/Introverts_vs_Extrovert_-_Tips_for_Designing_and_Facilitating.pdf)

### Grading: feedback and self-assessment

Note that in the FAR Centre model, the Instructor of Record grades all
student assessments. As a Facilitator, you are asked to give feedback in
class when appropriate, and to ensure students understand how to submit
assignments to the Instructor (via Moodle). In class, there may be
activities such as discussions and presentations that you are asked to
give feedback on. The following are some guidelines for feedback. You
are also encouraged to discuss assessment and feedback with the course
instructor before the course begins.

## Types of Feedback

**9 Effective Types Of Feedback**

1.  **Appreciation.**

> Appreciation is the key to opening the “feedback door.” Thanking
> students for submitting their work acknowledges and validates their
> time spent learning something new. Appreciation comments do not have
> to be drawn out to have a positive impact. They can be as simple as
> “thank you for sharing this awesome (idea/question/thought) with
> us.” Receiving a positive, appreciative comment at the outset,
> students are more likely to feel respected and engage with any
> additional feedback you provide.

2.  **Sayback.**

> Sayback involves restating what learners said. This shows learners
> that you hear their comments and lets them know that they are on the
> right track. Often, the best way to start a sayback comment is with an
> “I agree” or some other appreciative statement. For example, “I agree
> \[participant name\] that this video applies all of Mayer’s
> principles. I thought they were going to fall short in the redundancy
> principle and the voice would read the thought bubble at the end… I
> waited for it… no voice\! They nailed it\! Good find.”

3.  **Links to resources.**

> Sharing a link to a resource extends learning beyond the course
> content and introduces learners to new information, ideas,
> perspectives, and digital tools. Please encourage students to view the
> required and optional resources in the Moodle course. You may want to
> highlight some of these useful study tools in class as well.

4.  **Questions.**

> Asking a question is a good way to engage learners in conversations
> about their work. While answering questions, learners often reflect on
> the process of their work, which brings their comprehension into a
> deeper level. Questions can serve many purposes when providing
> feedback. They can be used to clarify the learners’ thinking (e.g.,
> “What did you mean by…”), to make the learning process more
> transparent (e.g., “Why did you…”), to inspire students to think about
> their work in a different way (e.g., “Have you considered looking at
> the topic from this perspective?”), to expand the learner’s’ knowledge
> or skills (e.g., “Have you considered exploring…”), and to encourage
> learners to make changes to their work (e.g., “Have you thought about
> trying…”).

5.  **Providing next steps.**

> Providing next steps is a way to let learners know what else they can
> do to improve their work and, looking ahead, to acquire greater
> knowledge and hone their skills. For example, one of our course
> facilitators wrote, “I also suggest you add some sound effects to grab
> the attention of the listener,” to help a participant figure out how
> to improve her video project.

6.  **Providing guidance.**

> Providing guidance is a way to scaffold student learning. This can be
> done by offering a suggestion, sharing advice, or providing insights
> that encourage students to reach just beyond what they think they are
> capable of doing. When providing guidance, it’s best to start with “I”
> (e.g., “I suggest”). Starting with “you” (e.g., “You should”) often
> tends to make learners feel defensive and they are less likely to
> respond. Here is an example from one of our course facilitators: “If
> you do decide to make this into a poster for a pointing reminder, I
> would suggest using less text. You could go over the steps in greater
> detail to introduce it, but for the poster, I would use short bullet
> points in a larger font so it could be used as a reference from afar.”

7.  **Sharing personal experiences.**

> Nothing links students and facilitators like shared experiences. It
> says “Hey…I’ve been there\!” to the student and helps foster a
> relationship of mutual respect. Besides increasing the sense of
> connection, sharing personal experiences makes the feedback feel more
> authentic and meaningful. Students want to learn from real world
> experiences. For example, one facilitator commented, “It would be
> awesome to see students work in groups with a Google Document and all
> team members adding and editing together. We facilitators actually do
> this often when collaborating on this course design and maintenance.
> It’s really effective\!”

8.  **Facilitators connecting learners.**

> Connecting learners encourages social learning, which enriches the
> course community and the learning process. Connecting participants can
> be done many different ways, depending on the tools you have
> available.

9.  **Providing encouragement.**

> Sometimes learners just need a few positive words of encouragement
> (e.g., “You can do it\!”) that show them you are invested in and
> support their learning. Providing encouragement often rekindles
> learners’ enthusiasm for an assignment or project and motivates them
> to keep improving their work.

These 9 types of feedback can be, and in many cases should be, mixed and
matched and, thus, used in a variety of ways to boost student
engagement. For example, you might start with an appreciative comment,
suggest a resource, and then ask a question to push the learner’s
thinking. Or, you could open with a personal experience and then connect
participants, encouraging them to help one another think about the
content in different ways.

One of the most challenging aspects of facilitating an online course is
figuring out which unique combination of feedback types can enhance each
student’s learning process and motivate the student to engage with the
class. We encourage you to test out one or more of these feedback types
for an upcoming assignment to see which ones work best for your students
and your course. You never know what will ignite that spark\!

Gaudreau, C. (2016, March 30). 9 Types Of Feedback To Boost Student
Engagement. Retrieved from
<https://elearningindustry.com/9-types-of-feedback-boost-student-engagement>

## Assessment

Note that in the FAR Centre model, the Instructor of Record grades all
student assessments. As a Facilitator, you are asked to give feedback in
class when appropriate. The following are some guidelines for summative
and formative feedback. You are also encouraged to discuss assessment
and feedback with the course instructor before the course begins.

### Summative VS Formative

**Formative assessment** is: assessment that is done throughout the
course. It is assessment provided during the process when the material
can still be changed before a final product is produced.

  - Helps determine growth areas.

  - Not always graded.

Formative asks:

  - Where am I trying to be?

  - Where am I now?

  - How do I close the gap? (Hanover, 2014)

**Summative assessment** is: an assessment on a final product or exam.
The product can no longer be modified.

Examples:

  - How did you enjoy today? (summative- measure satisfaction)
    
    Vs.

  - What did you learn today? (formative- measures learning outcomes)

During the day:

> Ask: what goals did you have for today?
> 
> Later on: have you met them? How?
> 
> What do you need to do to accomplish that goal?

Karsen, Belinda, Emma Rowbotham. “Formative Assessment & Data
Story-telling.” TOP BC 2018 Conference Summer Drive-In, June 8, 2018,
Langara College, Vancouver, BC.

Presentation 1A.

### Mid-Way Check-In

Students will receive formal feedback mid-way through the semester and
at the end. This mid-way point is a great time to get the students
thinking about their work, and to help them achieve what they set out to
do. At the half way point, the Instructor and/or Facilitator will
provide some formative assessment to the student on their learning.
Check in to see if there is anything the student wants more clarity on.

Guiding questions:

> What has been the most interesting assignment or activity that you’ve
> engaged in this semester?
> 
> What assignment did you find the most challenging? Why?
> 
> What else needs to be done to help you accomplish your goal for the
> semester?
> 
> What supports do you need to reach the goals you have for this course?
> 
> What have you learned so far? How has it impacted you?

### Assignment Rubrics

Most assignments will have grading rubrics the instructor will use to
evaluate assessments. These grading criteria are intended to help the
student understand the expectations of the assessment, to aim for
success, and to see clearly their strengths and areas for improvement.
Please go over rubric\! Before any assignments are submitted, direct
students to the grading criteria. You may want to ask students to
self-assess.

Guiding questions for discussing assessment rubrics:

> Going over the rubric, how do you think you have done?
> 
> After they have picked the grade they think they deserve, point to
> specific words on the rubric and ask, can you show me how you
> displayed \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_?
> 
> Tell me why you think you deserve a \_\_\_\_\_\_\_. Show examples in
> your assignment.
> 
> Are there areas that you excelled in and areas that you could have
> spent more time on?

Recognize that some students are harder on themselves than others. Be
sure to point out areas of strength in each student and to pinpoint
growth areas. Each student should feel encouraged by the process.

Through conversation with the student, let them know that there will be
some time for discussion the Transition Programs Director, but their
mark will be received with the other final grades online. Thank them for
their contribution to the class and provide encouragement for the
semester ahead\!

## Resources

# TWU Campus Resources

Important TWU Resources

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><blockquote>
<p><strong>Resources</strong></p>
</blockquote></th>
<th><strong>What is offered</strong></th>
<th><strong>Contact</strong></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><blockquote>
<p>Learning Commons</p>
</blockquote></td>
<td><ul>
<li><p>Academic Coaching</p></li>
<li><p>Academic Advising Office</p></li>
<li><p>Career &amp; Professional Development</p></li>
<li><p>Disabilities &amp; Equity of Access</p></li>
<li><p>Writing Centre</p></li>
<li><p>Major and Career</p></li>
</ul>
<p>Counselling –</p>
<p>Vocational analysis</p>
<ul>
<li><p>Resume analysis</p></li>
<li><p>Mock interviews</p></li>
<li><p>Paper editing assistance</p></li>
<li><p>Writing paper assistance</p></li>
<li><p>Study Skills</p></li>
<li><p>Learning disabilities</p></li>
</ul>
<p>assistance *Must be clinically diagnosed to receive assistance in classes</p></td>
<td><a href="https://www.twu.ca/learning-commons" class="uri">https://www.twu.ca/learning-commons</a></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><blockquote>
<p>Office of the Registrar</p>
</blockquote></td>
<td><ul>
<li><p>Payments</p></li>
<li><p>Course Registration</p></li>
<li><p>Late Course Withdrawal</p></li>
<li><p>Student Computers</p></li>
</ul></td>
<td><a href="http://www.twu.ca/academics/office-registrar" class="uri">http://www.twu.ca/academics/office-registrar</a> <strong>604-513-2070</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><blockquote>
<p>Campus Services</p>
</blockquote></td>
<td><ul>
<li><p>Student ID cards (meal plans, library)</p></li>
<li><p>Light bulbs,</p></li>
</ul>
<p>vacuums</p>
<ul>
<li><p>Get change for laundry</p></li>
<li><p>Lost and Found</p></li>
<li><p>Off campus housing info</p></li>
</ul></td>
<td><a href="https://www.twu.ca/housing" class="uri">https://www.twu.ca/housing</a> <strong>604-523-2032</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><blockquote>
<p>Bookstore</p>
</blockquote></td>
<td><ul>
<li><p>Textbook sales</p></li>
<li><p>TWU clothing</p></li>
<li><p>School supplies</p></li>
<li><p>Bibles, Christian fiction &amp; non fiction– Basic toiletries</p></li>
</ul></td>
<td><a href="http://www.bookstore.twu.ca/">www.bookstore.twu.ca</a> <strong>604-513-2005</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><blockquote>
<p>Technology Services</p>
</blockquote></td>
<td><ul>
<li><p>Email/Student Portal assistance</p></li>
<li><p>Computer hook-up</p></li>
<li><p>Computer repair</p></li>
<li><p>Wireless assistance</p></li>
</ul></td>
<td><a href="https://www1.twu.ca/services" class="uri">https://www1.twu.ca/services</a> <strong>604-513-3284</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><blockquote>
<p>Computer</p>
<p>labs – Neufeld</p>
<p>– CANIL</p>
</blockquote></td>
<td><ul>
<li><p>Student Computers</p></li>
<li><p>Printing</p></li>
</ul></td>
<td><a href="https://www8.twu.ca/library/printing-copying.html" class="uri">https://www8.twu.ca/library/printing-copying.html</a></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

  - Chill in a chair

The Well – Let the light in
<https://www.twu.ca/wellness-centre/mental-health-services/well>

  - Learning

## Games

Games and Ice Breakers

### Objective

Icebreakers help establish a positive environment and provide an
opportunity for students to get to know one another and the instructor,
both critical to the retention and success of students.

### Name Games

*Alliteration Name Game*: Get your group to sit in a circle. Go around
the circle and have each person say their name and an adjective/word
starting with the same letter. For instance, Terrific Timothy or Crazy
Camille. Then each person must repeat the names and associated
adjectives of all those who went before them.

*Dance Move*: This game is similar to the Alliteration name game. Get
your group to sit in a circle. Go around the circle and have each person
say their name and do a dance move. Then each person must repeat the
names and associated dance moves of all those who went before them.

*Bop It*: Get your group to stand in a circle. One person is standing in
the centre of the circle holding a shoe or a rolled up newspaper. One
person in the circle is chosen to start “safely” by saying their own
name and then the name of someone else in the circle (“Josh-Mary”). The
person in the middle will then try to hit the person whose name has been
said before that person says their own name and then someone else’s in
the circle (“Mary-Bob”). Whoever is hit while they are speaking/thinking
is “it.”

*Concentration*: This is the beat: slap, slap, snap, snap. (Slap each
knee and snap on each hand). On the first snap say your name, on the
second snap say someone elses (“Josh-Mary”), the person whose name was
called will do the same on the next two snaps (“Mary-Bob”). Don’t mess
up the beat/rhythm\! Try going faster and faster.

*Group Juggle*: Have 3 tennis balls handy and put the group into a
circle. Leader tosses one ball to someone in their group after saying
his/her name and then the name of the person they are throwing the ball
to (“Josh-Mary”). Mary (person who receives the ball) tosses the ball to
someone whose name she knows (“Mary-Bob”). Bob tosses the ball to
someone else, and so on. THEN, as that ball is going, SOS leader throws
second ball into the group using the same method (“Betty-Phil”). After 2
balls are going, add one more for kicks. If someone drops a ball, just
let them chase it down and join the game again.

### Get to know you Games

*Two Truths and a Lie*: Give every person in the group about 2-3 minutes
to think of two things about them that are true and then also get them
to make something up that is a lie (but a convincing one\!). When your
group is ready, go around the circle in any order and each individual
will say their 3 things (in random order). The rest of the group will
then have to guess which is the lie. People tend to share stories about
their truths if they are interesting enough. This is a great way to
learn fun things about people\!

*Pick Candy (or toilet paper) and talk*: Pass around a bowl of candy or
a roll of toilet paper and let everyone pick an arbitrary amount of
candy or toilet paper. Once all the students have their number, let them
know that the amount the picked is how many things they have to tell the
group about themselves.

*Partner TV commercial*: After splitting into pairs and interviewing
each other for a minute or so (there can be prescribed questions if
needed), describe your partner in a fun and exciting TV advertisement.

*Chain of Events*: One person starts the chain and says something they
are interested in or enjoy doing; they keep talking about themselves
until someone else in the group admits to enjoy the same things. The new
person joins the end of the chain and starts to talk about himself or
herself until someone else joins on. Finally, the person on the very end
of the chain has to talk until they find something in common with the
person who started the chain. This helps the SOS know what their group
is interested in, as well as helps the group realize they have things in
common. You can make it more interesting by setting parameters – can’t
talk about TWU, being a first year, housing, majors, etc.

*Balloon Toss*: Have each individual write down an interesting fact
about themselves on a slip of paper. Put the fact in the balloon and
blow it up. Have the group toss the balloons in the air and after 30
seconds have each person grab a balloon. Once everyone has a balloon
they need to pop it and find the person who wrote the fact. The slip of
paper can include more than just one fact; it could have a whole series
of questions each person would answer about themselves.

*The M\&M Breaker*: When students enter the classroom, they take an
M\&M. After they introduce themselves, what they share next depends on
their M\&M color. For example, red ones mean the best story from their
summer. Other ideas might include a funny childhood story, three hobbies
they enjoy doing, an embarrassing story…Be creative\!

*Multiple Choice*: Divide the room into four corners, one for each
letter of a multiple choice question that is read. For each question,
people must get up and move to their preferred corner.

*The Web We Weave*: Ask a question of someone in the circle and throw
them the ball of string. They hang on and pass the ball to a different
person, asking them a question about themselves. A web is created. For
fun, try different shapes with your group.

### Challenging/Problem Solving

*Silent Birthdays*: Divide your group into two smaller groups. Tell them
they cannot talk but have to arrange their group in order of birthdays
from earliest to latest. The first group to arrange themselves and jump
up and down is the group that wins (only if they actually are in the
right arrangement when you check).

*Human Knot*: The group starts out in one or two tight circles. Everyone
in the group reaches across the circle with their right hand to grab
another group member’s right hand. The group then reaches in with their
left hand to grab a different group member’s left hand. The object is to
untangle the group without letting go of hands until a circle is formed.
If the group is having extreme difficulty, you can administer “knot
first-aid” and break one set of tangled hands (with group consensus),
otherwise group members may not let go at any time. You may have to
decide as a group that the knot is not solvable, after prolonged
attempt.

NOTE: If the group is advanced, have them do it without talking.

*Pass the Squeeze*: Everyone joins hands in a circle, with someone in
the middle. The person in the middle tries to guess where the squeeze
is. Single squeeze passes it on. Double squeeze reverses directions. If
the person in the middle guesses where the squeeze is when you are doing
it, switch spots.

*Human Scrabble*: Divide into teams. Distribute random cards with
letters on them. Tape the letter on each person’s forehead. Each team
must use the letters that they have to form the longest word they
possibly can by standing in order. The longest word wins.

*Kleenex Blow*: Divide into two teams. Each team gets one Kleenex and
they must keep it in the air by blowing at it (not touching it). Whoever
keeps it up the longest wins. You could time the teams to allow the
other team to watch: that’s half the fun.

*Mystery Game*: Two people leave the room after being told they must
solve a mystery when they return by asking yes/no questions. The mystery
is every time a question is asked that ends with a vowel, the answer is
yes (no matter what the question is). If it ends in a consonant, the
answer is no. If it ends in “y”, the answer is maybe.

### Fun Games

*Chocolate Dress up*: Need: one LARGE chocolate bar, oven mitts, toque,
scarf, sunglasses, dress up clothes, plastic fork and spoon, pair of
dice. Everyone sits in a circle with all the objects in the middle.
Everyone takes turn rolling the dice. Once someone rolls doubles then
they run into the middle and put on all the stuff. They have to use the
fork and spoon to get into the wrapped chocolate bar and eat as much as
they can. The dice continue to get passed, once someone else gets a
double they get to run into the middle and take all the stuff off the
other person and try their hand at eating the chocolate.

*Fruit Salad*: Sit everyone in a circle and name them apple, banana,
pear. Go on doing this until they are all named with one of the three
fruits. You then select a caller who can shout either apple, banana,
pear, or fruit salad. If apple is shouted, all the apples have to get up
and swap seats as quickly as they can. The last person to sit down is
then the caller. If fruit salad is shouted, everyone must change places.

Play as many rounds as you like. You can also play with animals and can
only make the animal noises, as everyone runs around they have to make
the animal noise.

*Wink Murder*: Ask for one or two volunteer “sleuths”. Send them out of
the room. Get all other students in a circle and close their eyes.
You’ll begin walking around the circle and tell them that you will be
touching one or two of them on the head. These folks are the killers. Go
around and tap one or two of them on the head and when you have
completed one full revolution around the group, ask them to look up.
Tell them that they must look around the circle at each other and if you
are winked at, then you are to let out a blood-curdling scream and kneel
over to die. Then you pick yourself up and move out of the circle. It is
the task of the sleuths to figure out who the murderer(s) are.

*Famous Duos*: Print out a list of famous duos and cut them out (e.g.
Scooby Doo, Shaggy; Han Solo, Chewbacca; Lennon, McCartney etc.). Then
tape them to the group member’s backs and tell them they are to mingle
around, introduce themselves to people, and ask one YES/NO question
about who they are. Once they have figured out who they are, they need
to find their match.

*Big Booty, Big Booty*: This game is actually too difficult to explain
in words. It is a really fun game, but it needs to be demonstrated.
www.wikihow.com/Play-big-booty

*Balloon Tag*: Tie a balloon to everyone’s ankle. Try to stomp on
other’s balloons without yours getting broken. Last one with balloon
intact wins\!

*Interlocking Hands*: Everybody lies down on the ground in a circle.
Everybody puts his or her right arm over the next person’s left arm (and
therefore left arm under). You go around the circle taping the ground
with your hand. One tap continues the chain around the circle in the
same direction and two taps changes direction. If somebody moves when
they aren’t supposed to, that hand is taken out of the circle. Game
continues until there are only two people left.

*Follow the Leader*: One person exits the room. Pick a leader. The
person who exited is the detective – they have to go in the center of
the circle. Everyone starts clapping their hands and changes activities
only when the leader changes activities (ie: snapping, patting legs).
The detective has to try and guess who the leader is.

*Look Down Look Up*: Have everyone in your class get up and stand in a
relatively tight circle. Instruct everyone to look down and quickly
choose someone randomly in the circle that they will look at when they
are told to “look up”. Say, “look up”. If you are looking at someone who
is also looking at you then let out a blood curdling scream and then
“remove” one eye (by closing an eye). Repeat whilst choosing a new
random group member to look at each time. If you find yourself looking
at someone who also happens to have chosen you a second time, again let
out the cat-dying scream step out of the circle.

Game continues until there is one winner.

*Everybody’s It*: This is a quick game of tag where everyone is ‘it’. If
you tag someone, they are ‘out’, and the game continues until either one
or two players are left. The biggest rule here is that there is NO
RUNNING. As a primer, get someone to volunteer to demo the fine art of
‘speed walking’. This in itself is a good laugh.

*Find The Ball Blindfolded*: Sort the group into two teams. From each
team a player is blindfolded. There is only one ball. Both teams must
attempt to direct their blindfolded person to the ball while distracting
the other player. No touching the blindfolded folks\!

*Telephone Pictionary:* Have enough pieces of paper for each person to
have a stack of paper equal to the number of people in the group (if
there are 10 people then each person gets a stack of 10 pieces of
paper). Every person comes up with a word or phase and writes it on the
first pieces of paper, they pass it to the next person. They then have
to read the word or phrase and draw a picture of that, pass it to the
next person. They have to look at the picture and try to write down in a
word or phrase as to what they think the picture is. Once all the stacks
have made a full circle, take turns reading off and showing the
transformation of the words, phrases, and
pictures.

(http://derailedtelephonepictionary.wordpress.com/what-is-telephone-pictionary/)

*Knights, Maidens (or Damsels), Cavaliers*: Get your group to pair up
with someone of approximately the same size (or one guy with one girl).
Demonstrate the following positions (and alternate positions).

*Knights*: One partner is kneeling on one knee and the other partner
sits on the knee that is up (Alternative: partner two doesn’t put any
weight on knee).

*Maidens* *(or Damsels)*: One partner jumps into the arms of the other
partner (Alternative: partner two lifts one leg and partner one holds it
up).

*Cavaliers*: One partner jumps onto the back of the other partner
(Alternative: partner one bends at the knees and partner two stands
behind them with their hand in the air)

Ensure that you have demonstrated the alternative poses so that nobody
gets hurts. You will call out a position and the last pair that gets
into this position is out of the game. Continue until there is one group
left (or you have gone on too long).

*Alphabet Charades*: Form groups of 4-5 players and have each group
designate a starting actor. The facilitator (you) will then call out a
letter and the actors will try to act out words that begin with the
letter you called out, and the rest of the team has to guess. If they
guess right, the actor yells “yes” and they receive one point. Continue
for as long as you see fit, switching up actors as you go.

*Catching the Snake’s Tail*: The group holds hands. The front of the
line tries to catch the back of the line without breaking the chain.

### Simple Classics

> Card games: Dutch Blitz, UNO, etc.
> 
> Board Games
> 
> Charades
> 
> Sports Gear
> 
> Bop-It
> 
> Sidewalk Chalk
> 
> Go for a walk around the pond
> 
> Picnic Potluck C-Group Meeting

## Students in Distress

How to Deal with Distressed Students

A Guide for TWU Student Leaders, Faculty and Staff

Prepared by the Wellness Centre

Any member of the Trinity Western University community may come into
contact with a distressed student. Being aware of distress signals,
methods of intervention, and sources of help for the student can help
you feel more in control of situations that may arise. The mental health
professionals at the Counseling Center are available to student leaders,
faculty and staff for consultation regarding these issues. Feel free to
call us at 513-2100 if you would like to discuss these matters further.

### Distress Signals

Listed below are some of the more prevalent signs of someone in
distress. This list is intended to provide basic information only.

1.  Depression. We all may feel depressed from time to time, “normal”
    depressions may consist of only one or two symptoms and usually pass
    within days. Clinically depressed students exhibit multiple symptoms
    for a longer period of time. Some of the symptoms include: sleep
    disturbances, poor concentration, change in appetite, loss of
    interest in pleasurable activities, withdrawal, poor hygiene, loss
    of self-worth, and preoccupation with death.

2.  Agitation or Acting Out. This would represent a departure from
    normal or socially appropriate behavior. It includes being
    disruptive, restlessness or hyperactivity, being antagonistic, and
    increased alcohol and/or drug abuse.

3.  Disorientation. Some distressed students may seem “out of it.” You
    may witness a diminishment in awareness of what is going on around
    them, forgetting or losing things, misperception of facts or
    reality, rambling or disconnected speech, and behavior that seems
    out of context or bizarre.

4.  Drug Abuse. This affects the brain and body directly. Stimulants
    like cocaine and methamphetamine “amp up” the body. Drugs like
    opiates or marijuana slow down the body, breathing and alertness.
    Signs of abuse include cycles of increased energy and restlessness,
    abnormally slow movements, speech or reaction time, confusion and
    disorientation. For snorted drugs, chronic trouble with nosebleeds
    and for smoked drugs, a persistent cough leading to coughing up
    excessive mucus or blood.

5.  Alcohol Abuse. The difference between social drinking and alcohol
    abuse is when alcohol becomes the focus. A student may only want to
    attend social events that involve alcohol. Alcohol abusers drink too
    much on a regular basis and the alcohol use is self-destructive.
    Signs of alcohol abuse include slurred speech, unsteadiness,
    blackouts, redness in the face, increased irritability, and
    unexplained absences.

6.  Suicidal Thoughts. Most people who attempt suicide communicate early
    messages about their distress. These messages can range from “I
    don’t want to be here”, to a series of vague “good-byes”, to “I’m
    going to kill myself.” Non-verbal messages could include giving away
    valued items, and putting legal, financial, and University affairs
    in order. All of the above messages should be taken seriously.

7.  Violence and Aggression. You may become aware of a student who is
    dangerous to others. This may be manifested by physically violent
    behavior or verbal threats or threatening e-mails/letters, harassing
    or stalking behavior, and papers or exams that contain violent or
    threatening material.

8.  Panic Attacks. Everyone knows what it’s like to feel worried,
    nervous, afraid or panicky. Often anxiety is short-lived, but
    sometimes it can be debilitating and lead to full blown panic
    attacks. When a person is having a panic attack, they experience
    shortness of breath, heart palpitations, dizziness, sweating,
    nausea, a feeling of unreality – like they’re “not all there”; or
    like they are losing control of their mind.

### Intervention Guidelines

While it’s not expected that you be a “watchdog,” you may be the first
contact for a student in distress and in a position to ask a few
questions. Following these guidelines can lead to a positive outcome for
all parties.

1.  Safety First\! Always keep safety in mind as you interact with a
    distressed student. Maintain a safe distance and a route of escape
    should you need it. If danger to you or the student seems imminent,
    call 911 or Security at local 2099.

2.  Avoid Escalation. Distressed students can sometimes be easily
    provoked. Avoid threatening, humiliating, and intimidating
    responses. It is usually not a good idea to “pull rank” and assert
    authority unless you are certain of the student’s mental health
    status. Distressed students are in need of listening and support.

3.  Ask Direct Questions. Take a calm and matter-of-fact approach. Ask
    students directly if they are drunk, confused or if they have
    thoughts of harming themselves. You need not be afraid to ask these
    questions. You will not be “putting ideas in their heads” by doing
    so. Most distressed students are relieved to know that someone has
    noticed and is paying attention.

4.  Do Not Assume You Are Being Manipulated. While it is true that some
    students appear distressed in order to get attention or relief from
    responsibility, only a thorough assessment can determine this.

Attention-seekers can have serious problems and be in danger, too.

5.  Know Your Limits. You will be able to assist many distressed
    students on your own by simply listening and referring them for
    further help. Some students need much more than you can provide.
    Encourage them for confiding in you, be accepting and nonjudgmental,
    try to identify problem areas, and indicate that seeking
    professional help is a positive and responsible thing to do.

Some signs that you may have over-extended yourself include:

· *Feeling stressed out or overwhelmed by the situation*

· *Feeling angry at the student*

· *Feeling afraid*

· *“Reliving” similar experiences of your own*

### Referral Sources

TWU Wellness Center: 604-513-2024

## How to Pray Outloud

How to Pray Out Loud\!

> 1\.

### Pray Out Loud When You’re Alone

Praying out loud often means only praying out loud when others ask you
to pray publicly or in a group. Don’t wait for an invitation. There’s no
need to limit praying out loud to group or public prayer. Start praying
out loud when you’re alone.

> Simply say your usual silent prayers out loud.
> 
> Listen to what you say when you pray.
> 
> Notice the content, is it too much of a “gimme” session or is it
> inclusive of others?

Get going\! You’ll feel more comfortable praying out loud with every
prayer session.

### **2.** Keep it Short

Prayer doesn’t have to be long to be effective. Your prayers come from
your heart, so don’t let your mouth keep moving after your heart has
been heard.

> Get to the point quickly
> 
> Use the language you use every day.
> 
> Avoid unnatural expressions that look good on paper but sound forced.

The best spoken prayers are sincere, short, and easy to understand.

### **3.** Get Your Style On

With a little thought and planning you can develop your own effective
prayer style. Prayer is a means of communicating with God. Keep in mind,
even God loves a good communicator. Frame an authentic “prayer story” by
focusing on 3 prayer points:

> “Who” you’re praying for (self, others)
> 
> “Why” you’re praying (to give thanks, ask for blessings, acknowledge
> and praise)
> 
> “What” you’re praying for (help, healing, hope)

These focus points are only examples of how to develop a powerful
prayer. You’ll find many more ways to transform your prayer thoughts to
spoken prayer.
